## Literature Review

Structural MRI (sMRI) is a pivotal biomarker for assessing the progression and patterns of the volumetric changes of the whole brain and specific regions associated with macroscopic neurodegeneration(1) in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Studies have established that atrophy of the grey matter (GM), and neurofibrillary tangles (causing neuronal cell death - microscopic characterisation of neurodegeneration) in Braak stages III and IV are correlated by location(2,3).
Volumetric changes include the atrophy of GM and white matter (WM), the hippocampus, a decrease in cortical thickness, and consequently, the enlargement of the ventricles and a decrease in the total brain volume (1,4,5). Assessing the degree of tissue loss is a crucial part of sMRI, including the degree of atrophy during the progression of MCI (Mild Cognitive Impairment) to AD, associated with cognitive defects(1). The hippocampus is commonly utilised due to its high contrast on T1-weighted sMRI, clear boundaries, aforementioned association with the Braak stages, and proven sensitivity and specificity in measuring volume reduction (73% and 81% respectively) (1,2,6).
All are validated markers for tracking AD progression since it is sensitive to change from the MCI stage (before dementia happens) to later AD stages, in comparison to levels of amyloid-β (Aβ) and phosphorylated tau in the CSF (which plateaus by the MCI phase) (1). The National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer’s criteria also states medial temporal atrophy as one of the three markers of AD (1). sMRI can even differentiate between patterns of brain atrophy caused by different forms of dementia (e.g., frontotemporal dementia and AD) (5). The enlargement of ventricles is frequently used to measure the progression of AD, due to its contrast in T1- weighted MRI images and its quantitative increase between patients with AD, and healthy elderly controls (5-16% and 1.5-3.0%, respectively) (1).
sMRI is important to measure therapies' effect on vital brain structures or overall volume(1) in cohort studies or drug trials (phases II and III), such as hippocampal and whole-brain atrophy measurements to determine the impact of therapies for counteracting the effects of AD (9,10). Also, sMRI is used in deep learning algorithms to estimate whether individuals will progress from MCI to AD (11).
However, deriving volumetric information is dependent on segmentation, which provides variable results depending on which segmentation software is used(7). Additionally, atrophy mainly occurs in the later stages of AD, so would not be useful for detecting the early asymptomatic stages of AD (8), whereas amyloid markers in the CSF would be more suitable(1). Also, volumetric information, such as medical temporal atrophy, is not specific enough to differentiate between all dementias, so is often combined with CSF biomarkers for a more accurate diagnosis (1).
sMRI is a validated biomarker for assessing MCI and AD, despite its limitations in assessing the early stages of AD. More robust and automated algorithms for volumetric analysis of brain structures are needed to develop a standardised practice of acquiring accurate volumetric measurements to predict AD and implement treatment at an earlier stage.Longitudinal studies are required to determine the most accurate combination of biomarkers to use for diagnosing AD cases earlier and measuring clinical trial outcomes.

### References
1. Frisoni GB, Fox NC, Jack CR, Scheltens P, Thompson PM. The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010 Feb;6(2):67–77.
2. Whitwell JL, Josephs KA, Murray ME, Kantarci K, Przybelski SA, Weigand SD, et al. MRI correlates of neurofibrillary tangle pathology at autopsy: A voxel-based morphometry study. Neurology. 2008 Sep 2;71(10):743–9.
3. Jack CR, Holtzman DM. Biomarker Modeling of Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron. 2013 Dec;80(6):1347–58.
4. Vemuri P, Jack CR. Role of structural MRI in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2010 Aug 31;2(4):23.
5. Yu Q, Mai Y, Ruan Y, Luo Y, Zhao L, Fang W, et al. An MRI-based strategy for differentiation of frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021 Dec 12;13(1):23.
6. Yuan Y, Gu ZX, Wei WS. Fluorodeoxyglucose–Positron-Emission Tomography, Single-Photon Emission Tomography, and Structural MR Imaging for Prediction of Rapid Conversion to Alzheimer Disease in Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Meta-Analysis. American Journal of Neuroradiology. 2009 Feb;30(2):404–10.
7. Nunes Schuck P, Silva de Araújo A, Brigide de Almeida Mantovani D, Gonçalves Cavedini N, Marques da Silva AM. Volumetric measurements of brain in multiple sclerosis: comparison of segmentation methods in simulated MRI data. In: Išgum I, Colliot O, editors. Medical Imaging 2023: Image Processing. SPIE; 2023. p. 127.
8. Falgàs N, Sánchez-Valle R, Bargalló N, Balasa M, Fernández-Villullas G, Bosch B, et al. Hippocampal atrophy has limited usefulness as a diagnostic biomarker on the early onset Alzheimer’s disease patients: A comparison between visual and quantitative assessment. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;23:101927.
9. Jack CR, Slomkowski M, Gracon S, Hoover TM, Felmlee JP, Stewart K, et al. MRI as a biomarker of disease progression in a therapeutic trial of milameline for AD. Neurology. 2003 Jan 28;60(2):253–60.
10. Gauthier S, Aisen PS, Ferris SH, Saumier D, Duong A, Haine D, et al. Effect of tramiprosate in patients with mild-to-moderate alzheimer’s disease: Exploratory analyses of the MRI sub-group of the alphase study. J Nutr Health Aging. 2009 Jun 4;13(6):550–7.
11. Basaia S, Agosta F, Wagner L, Canu E, Magnani G, Santangelo R, et al. Automated classification of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment using a single MRI and deep neural networks. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;21:101645.
